---
---

# Deploy trust\|me on x86 hardware

This section describes how to deploy trust\|me on a x86 platform.
Therefore you need the [image created during the build process]({{ "/" | abolute_url }}build/build#build-trustme-image). If not already done, please follow the [build instructions]({{ "/" | abolute_url }}build/build/).

## Create bootable medium
In first place, assure the needed packages are installed on sour system. 
```
   apt-get install util-linux btrfs-progs gdisk parted
```
Copy the image to the target device.  
   **WARNING: This operation will wipe all data on the target device**
```
   sudo <yocto workspace directory>/trustme/build/yocto/copy_image_to_disk.sh <trustme-image> </path/to/target/device>
```

## Boot trust\|me

Boot the target device from the created bootable medium using UEFI. If a CSM is enabled in the BIOS settings, it has to be disabled. The shell will become available on tty12. To access it, press Ctrl+Alt+F12.

# Optional steps
## Enable secure boot

This step is (optional in development and testing setups. It describes how to configure UEFI Secure Boot for trust\|me. For more information refer, e.g., to the following article:

* [https://www.rodsbooks.com/efi-bootloaders/controlling-sb.html](https://www.rodsbooks.com/efi-bootloaders/controlling-sb.html)

### Create a bootable keytool image
Create the nottable image using bitbake and wic
```
   bitbake trustme-keytool
   wic create -e trustme-keytool keytoolimage
```
Copy the keytool image to an USB device  
**WARNING: This will wipe all data on the target device**
```
   dd if=<keytoolimage.img> of=</path/to/target/device>
```

### Replace Platform keys with generated ones

Before proceeding, you may choose to backup your current Secure Boot keys.
To do so, boot your system from the created USB device using UEFI. Again, if a CSM is enabled, you have to disable it first.
To backup sour keys, use the *Save keys* option in the keytool menu.

Now, your UEFI Secure Boot configuration has to be reset to *Setup mode*. The steps to achieve this are UEFI-dependent. Usually the Menu items are named like this:
* UEFI -> Security -> Secure Boot -> "Erase platform key" / "Reset to setup mode"

For the exact UEFI options, please refer to your UEFI vendor.

After the UEFI Secure Boot has been set to *Setup Mode*, the Secure Boot keys can be replaced using the keytool.
Therefore, boot your machine using the USB drive containing the keytool. After boot, perform the following steps using the keytool menu:
```
   KeyTool -> Edit Keys
   Replace db with keys/DB.esl
   Replace KEK with keys/KEK.esl
   Replace PK with keys/PK.auth
```
Now you can enable Secure Boot in the UEFI menu and start using trust\|me.
Again, for exact instructions how to enable secure boot, please refer to your UEFI vendor.
